men who ejaculate 21 times or more a
month are less likely to develop
prostate cancer Jesus Christ why it's
because Dr Reena Malik board certified
urologist expert on sexual health and a
rock star in educating the public on the
facts and myths of sex Reena I want to
start with this idea that other couples
are having significantly more sex than
we are big myth people are having sex
about once a week will myis get smaller
as I age it can so in terms of how do we
maintain our penal th you need to have
is there a disparity between how long we
think sex should take and how long it
actually takes yeah we all think it
lasts longer women want it to be 18 to
25 minutes men are a little on the
shorter side like maybe 12 minutes is
there like an average time 5.1 to 5.7
minutes then there too much masturbation
going to have an adverse effect for men
and women masturbation is generally safe
as long as you don't that's when a
becomes a problem Reena do we understand
our bodies as it relates to our Sexual
Health not at all for example with
pelvic floor it's involved in orgasm
it's involved in sexual function but no
one really talks about it in fact men
will be shocked oh I have a pelvic floor
too and there's a whole host of issues
that can come from having a weak pelvic
floor including erectile dysfunction so
how can I strengthen my pelvic floor
pelvic floor exercises they're going to
increase orgasm they're going to make
your semen Propel further and ultimately
it would be something as simple as it's
absolutely crazy to me that so many of
you have decided to watch our show um
and so many of you have decided to
subscribe to our show we now have five
million subscribers on YouTube which is
a number that I just can't comprehend
and it's a dream that I absolutely never
could have had we started the Dio just
over three years ago now and in my
wildest expectations we might have had
100,000 subscribers by now so you can
imagine how shocked I am that so many of
you have chosen to tune into these
conversations every week um and spend
some time with us so thank you and I
made a deal with you I made a deal that
if you subscrib to this show that we
would continue to raise the bar and in
2024 we're going to raise the bar like
never before I've been working for the
last 9 months on a surprise for all of
you that have subscribed to the show and
I'm very excited to deliver that for you
the production's going to change we're
going to go even further with our guests
and we're going to tell even more Global
stories so as always if you appreciate
what we're doing here the simple free
favorite ask from you is to hit the
Subscribe button let's get on with the
[Music]
episode Dr Reena Malik with all of your
work what is it that you're seeking to
do so what I'm seeking to do is have
people understand that sexual health is
health I think we have so much
misunderstanding about one what is good
sexual ual Health how do you why is good
sex important why is it good to have
good sexual health and that creates a
lot of Despair and Devastation and
people don't talk about it so they
ruminate they feel bad about themselves
and it's pervasive throughout their
entire life so I think ultimately my
goal is to make education freely
accessible and understandable so people
can know what's going on with their
bodies what's normal what's not and
what's available to help them how do you
define sexual health so sexual health is
sort of an individual thing but most
people would say that you are able to
have sex you are able to have an orgasm
you are able to have pleasure and
achieve the benefits of that do we
understand our bodies as it relates to
our sexual health no not at all I will
tell you so I talk about for example um
how it's normal to have erections at
night or have even nocturnal emission so
have a wet dream how that's a normal
physiologic function and so many people
will message me and say how can I stop
having what they call Nightfall or how
can I stop waking up with an erection
because they think for some reason it's
shameful or it's a bad thing and when re
realistically it's just normal and part
of it is Media right so when you see TV
you see a man getting an erection very
quickly he's initi immediately
penetrating a woman and she's
immediately orgasming and the whole Act
is like really hot and heavy and in
reality that's not what sex is like so
if you're not seeing what normal sex is
like what normal foreplay is like what
the fact that it's normal to sometimes
have difficulty getting an erection
that's normal sometimes to not have an
orgasm for a woman or it may take more
time to get a woman aroused and require
more foreplay that you are essentially
looking at a script that's not real and
then you're like what's wrong with me am
I broken you know is something wrong
with my body that it doesn't function
the way I'm seeing on TV or on Media or
on erotic films where does your
experience on this subject come from so
I'm a urologist by training a board
certified urologist so we are the
medical and surgical doctors of the
genital urinary tract so we're
essentially the plumbers so when you
have a problem with your kidneys the
tubes that drain the kidneys the bladder
or your genitals we're the ones who are
going to fix those if they're a surgical
issue and also we deal with the medical
aspects of some of those things and so
that's what my training was in but when
I started my social media my channel I
wanted to offer education to people and
as I started making this education I
realized how badly people wanted to know
about sexual health how much they didn't
know and how they really wanted to be
empowered with this information and
people are not being asked about sexual
function even when you go to see your
primary doctor when was the last time
they asked you about anything they might
ask you about erections but that's
probably where it ends right even if
they ask about that they're definitely
not asking women are you having orgasms
they're definitely not asking um anyone
if sex is pleasurable they're not asking
them if they feel satisfied with the way
things are going right and if they are
enjoying desire do they feel normal and
so I realized there was such a
disconnect here with what people wanted
to know and what was available to them
and so then I started really making
content about sexual health and spending
more time investigating in that area
treating patients in that area and it
totally became a all-encompassing field
for me you're an expert in the pelvic
floor as well MH what was your sort of
training with the pelvic floor so when
you do a fellowship in what we call
pelvic female pelvic medicine a lot of
what we do is related to the strength or
weakness of the pelvic floor and so the
pelvic floor just to start is a bowl of
muscles that sits in your pelvis so your
organs the bladder the rectum for women
the vagina the uterus the urethra all
run through the pelvic floor it attaches
to the bones on your pelvis and it is
extremely important for a variety of
functions it offers stability so when
you're standing sitting it offers
stability it offers the ability to
defecate and urinate normally it offers
uh when women have pregnancy the pelvic
Flor becomes very important it's
involved in orgasm it's involved in
sexual function but no one really talks
about it no one really knows it in fact
men will be shocked oh I have a pelvic
floor too because we talk about it a lot
with women right we talk about it in
terms of oh I might leak a little after
I've had babies when I cough or sneeze
or jump on a trampoline but the pelvic
floor is much more complex than that and
so very often we'll see people when they
have weakness of the pelvic floor yeah
we'll see leakage of urine and but
sometimes their pelvic floor can be
discoordinated or it can be too tight or
or have elevated tone and so what that
means is that you can develop a whole
host of abnormalities and that can be
that you may have constipation you may
have issues emptying your bladder you
may feel like you have to go to the blad
go to the bathroom a lot so you may
urinate frequently you may feel the urge
to go often sometimes it can cause pain
so it can cause pain when you urinate
might feel like you're having a UTI it
may cause pain with erection or
ejaculation for men so there's a whole
host of issues that can come from having
pelvic floor abnormalities and even if
you've had say lower back injuries or
hip injuries they can affect the
coordination of the pelvic floor because
it's all interconnected and so I will
see patients who are like you know I've
had a bunch of hip issues because I
played Sports when I was younger and now
I'm having issues with sexual function
and so it's all interconnected and I
think we we don't spend enough time
talking about how important it is and
how valuable it is to people when
they're having problems I want to go
into the pelvic floor in more detail and
really figure out how I can improve my
pelvic floor and what I'm doing to harm
or hurt it but you said something there
about doctors don't ask about sexual
health they don't ask if for orgasming
they don't ask if for ejaculating those
kinds of things why should they be
asking about that because I think of a
doctor as I don't know fixing other
parts of my body I don't think of them
as sifting through my sexual life so if
you have a normal sexual life and you're
satisfied with it it won't even it
wouldn't even bother you right you
wouldn't think about it but people who
have difficulties they may be walking
around feeling shame they may be walking
around wondering what's wrong with them
this can be pervasive because they may
have relationship issues and they may
have problems in their life with their
relationship that they're then causing
them to be less productive at work less
happy less satisfied with life feeling
more depressed more anxious and so it
all comes together and in fact the other
really important thing at least for men
we know that when they develop issues
with a so say you're having erectile
dysfunction and you are diagnosed today
with erectile dysfunction 7 years later
about 15% of those men will have a heart
attack and the reason for that is
because if it's a blood flow issue the
arteries to the penis are about 1 to 2
millim the arteries to the heart are
about 3 to 4 millim and when you have
about a 50% occlusion of a blood vessel
because of high blood pressure high
cholesterol heart disease that organ
will start to have problems and so you
will start to see erectile dysfunction
in men who have vascular problems before
you start having chest pain or other
signs of heart disease so it's and
probably similarly in women although the
data is not as we don't have that data
for women that maybe if they all of a
sudden are developing problems with
arousal that maybe there that's an
indicator but again that's more complex
and we don't have the data for that but
certainly for men we have a clear
indication that a problem with erections
could precede really serious heart
consequences and when you look at people
who've had a heart attack about 50% of
men will have had erectile dysfunction
prior to that 50%
mhm is a pelvic floor dysfunction in men
also linked to erectile dysfunction are
because I I heard in some of your work
that sitting every single day in in the
way that I do here I sit sometimes here
for 10 hours a day could be creating
erectile dysfunction well so it's more
that sitting every day can cause your
pelvic floor to not stretch
appropriately right like if you're not
moving your body regularly and your body
tenses up from sitting all day then your
pelvic floor is not relaxing and
Contracting in a normal fashion and so
some people will develop some tension in
the pelvic floor and through the pelvic
floor runs a whole bunch of arteries and
nerves that then go to the penis to
provide blood flow and so if your pelvic
floor is clenched really tight then it
can cause problems in getting blood flow
and then problems in getting erections
so while that's not um that's different
than having vascular problems this is a
muscular problem more so um that that
that can be an issue with in terms of
causing erectile dysfunction in some men
because I heard during Co there was a
rise in pelvic floor dysfunction as
people were sitting all day yeah I mean
I definitely saw it I don't know if it's
been actually studied but I definitely
saw it in my own clinical uh setting and
many of my colleagues did people would
come in and they would start having
either they'd be having more erectile
dysfunction they might be having more
urinary urgency meaning they got to go
got to go to the bathroom or they're
going more often which wasn't a huge
issue because they the bathroom was
right near them but they did sometimes
notice that it was a change and and also
sometimes they would some people even
deal with pain like they would have more
pain in that area or women would think
they were having urinary tract
infections when they truly were just
having discomfort from the pelvic floor
being tense one of the that you're
particularly good at is taking on some
of the big myths as it relates to sexual
health and I I want to start with one of
the big myths around Sexual Health which
is this idea that we all think other
people and other couples are having
significantly more sex than we are yeah
so that's interesting I think that is a
big myth and so when you look at um
people want to know like what's normal
how much sex should I be having right
and there's no ideal number but when you
look at studies right which I've looked
at large numbers of people people who
are in partnered relationships are
having sex about once a week on average
if they're have if they feel they're you
know in in partner relationships where
sex is always available but it's so
variable personto person and what I
really like to say is it's not the
quantity of sex that matters it's the
quality of sex right so if you're having
good sex once a month that may be
sufficient for you rather than having
mediocre or bad sex four times a month
or 10 times a month even right and and
so ultimately there's no right number
it's really what's right for you and I
think focusing on some like Benchmark
right of sex is is actually harmful
right because now you're like oh well I
need to have sex this many times what
what is the purpose of sex right the
purpose of sex is pleasure and sometimes
people derive a lot of benefits from
orgasm we know that there's physiologic
benefits to orgasm in terms of stress
reduction more Focus potentially better
sleep and even maybe lower blood
pressure things like that so if people
are deriving benefit from the orgasms
and the intimacy with their partner and
the pleasure they derive from sex that's
what matters right not the number of
times you're having sex another big myth
around sex which I thought i' um get
your take on is about pain during sex
it's one of the sort of most uh popular
questions that I often guess get
whenever I speak to someone that is an
expert on sexual health
is is sex supposed to hurt because for a
lot of people it hurts no it's not
supposed to hurt so if it hurts you want
to assess you know what usually it's the
female partner who feels pain right so
is it that you're not lubricated enough
is it that you have not had enough
foreplay because the body prepares for
intercourse particularly in the female
so what happens is you go through
arousal your body self- lubricates and
the vagina actually lengthens and widens
all almost double in size to accommodate
the phus or whatever you're using
whether it's a toy or or or a finger or
anything and so if you don't have
sufficient time to allow those things to
happen then it will be painful and
sometimes lubrication can be variable
personto person so some people may have
copious amounts of lubrication and some
people may have less and it could be
based on genetics it could be based on
the age they are what stage of their
hormonal status it can be based on what
medic ation they're on that might
decrease lubrication I think there's
another big myth is that lubricant is
not for everybody and I I argue that
lubricant is for everybody that it makes
things more fun it makes things more
slippery it makes things more enjoyable
and it certainly makes pain less of an
issue for a lot of people now there can
be other issues that cause pain so if
you've tried all these things you know
you're fully aroused you know you're
lubricated you know that you're still
having pain then it's really important
to get evaluated to to understand what
exactly is causing the pain it could be
hormonal changes in the vestibule which
is a part of the vagina that is very
hormonally sensitive that can be painful
it can be pelvic Flor dysfunction it can
be things like endometriosis or other
factors that may be going on that need
really Advanced help uh but most of the
time a lot of people can feel and enjoy
sex more readily if they just increase
the amount of foreplay and increase the
amount of lubrication you said that the
vagina
expands during sex so how much does it
expand by and how long does that take
because I think men don't really
understand this process a lot of men
just like to rush in there you know yeah
yeah so usually it expands by about
double double in length and double in
width and so it will expand and
basically the cervix is moving up and
out of the way the vagina is expanding
to accommodate the length of a phus and
and it takes we think on average about
18 to 20 minutes so it that's sort of
the amount of time it and some people
faster and some people longer but
ultimately you know sort of like
understanding that but also um the
lubrication is another big part of it
and so I think both those things
together um you know you need you need
some time and some people like I said
they may not take 18 minutes they may
take a couple minutes and so it's very
reasonable to get in there if that's
what your partner wants but again I
think the bigger issue is that we're not
communicating about sex no one taught us
how to talk about sex right I didn't
grow up talking about sex with my family
many of my friends and colleagues did
not grow up unless they were in a family
that was very Progressive talking about
sex or even learning about sex from
their parents and at school you don't
learn much you learn how to put on a
condom you learn how to ask for consent
you learn about STDs and that's if
you're lucky in the US 13 states don't
have to have accurate sex education like
it's not a requirement for sex education
to be accurate in 13 states in the US
where are we learning sex from so the
large majority of young people I mean
this data shows that at least one in
four adolescents are learning sex from
porn and it's probably more than that so
I think a lot of people are learning
either from uh pornography from their
friends a small subset are learning from
their parents there still are people
learning about sex from their parents
but ultimately it's not enough and so if
people are learning about sex through
porn porn is entertainment it is
doctored it is not real and I think
people then take that and they say why
did not my sexual encounter not look
like that why didn't I have as much
semen volume why did my partner not
orgasm as quickly and it can be on both
sides where women can be like why didn't
I react like that why didn't I get so
excited right away and I think there's
it's a real problem in terms of if
people are only learning about sex
through pornography then they're already
set up to be let down when they have
their first sexual encounter and on that
point of communication we don't talk
about it as a society but then even
within our own relationship
you know we don't talk about things
we're struggling with with our own
partners and the insecurities that we
have and I think that can cause a spiral
of misunderstanding and I've seen that
in my own sex life historically where
maybe there was something I was insecure
about or there's something I was
thinking about and instead of
communicating it I might have just acted
in a strange way and then that's
misinterpreted and then the other person
gets a little bit insecure or whatever
and then you kind of have this downward
spiral of misunderstanding which leads
to like sexlessness absolutely you're
just avoiding the situ ation because
nobody wants to talk about it and this
is the problem like you know people ask
me like what's this what's the key
what's the key what's the secret the
secret is you have to know what you like
right you have to know what you want and
you have to communicate it with your
partner how so this is the issue it's
not easy it's not easy because no one
taught us how to have these
conversations and they're charged with a
lot of emotion right you feel insecure
you feel inadequate or you feel
resentful because you're not getting
what you want out of the relationship
and so it has to come from a place of
understanding that this conversation is
not a oneandone there's no the talk
there are multiple talks over multiple
periods of time and the first time you
have the talk it might be a total
disaster but you know if you were in a
relationship where someone really also
has the same goals as you of having a
great relationship with a good sex life
then ideally it that won't continue and
you will continue to have conversations
so what I tell people is don't have
conversations in the bedroom not right
before not right after sex you want to
wait until you're out of the bedroom not
during or during definitely not during
that's happened before [__] was yeah
yeah that's pretty bad that's pretty bad
um so you know one and then two have it
in a place like somebody you don't to be
looking at the person right you can be
sitting in a car you can be going on a
walk because it's really awkward to look
at someone in the face and be like you
know what I felt like this wasn't really
great you know and and so then to be
like okay like you know talk again using
the same sort of communication
techniques that you use for other things
talking about eye statements not being
you did this you didn't do this more
about like how I feel what really turns
me on what I would really like in the
relationship and then sort of realizing
that they may not react well they might
be like oh my God I can't believe we're
talking about this they have their own
stereotypes and biases that they're
bringing into that conversation too or
their shame or whatever they grew up
with in society whatever they think
about sex can be very charged right and
so it's sort of a lot of work to get
through that but realizing that it could
take time and sometimes getting help so
seeing a sex therapist or someone who
has expertise in Psychology and sex to
talk learn how to talk about sex with
them and and navigating the difficulties
of it but it's worth the investment
right it's not easy but nothing in life
that's good or worth getting is easy
right okay so there's a couple listening
right now there's probably one member of
the couple listening right now and
they've heard everything you've said but
they have reached the point of noet
return in their relationship as far as
they're concerned they've not been
having sort of a functional healthy sex
life for maybe one year maybe 6 months
maybe 5 years and it's just become The
New Normal MH what is the case you would
make to that person to get them to take
action to try and rectify the situation
well I would ask them first how
important is sex to them right if it's
not that important and the other things
in their relation and that's okay right
some people find that okay everything
else in the relationship is excellent I
love this person we're still in intimate
we still love each other we still cuddle
we still um have a lot of great things
in our relationship and and sex right
now is not working right or it's not
it's not working for us so um I'm okay
with that that's fine like you don't
have to feel bad about that but I think
that if it is a problem then I think
it's worth working on right like if you
have a relationship that you value and
that person you're you're with values
their relationship then it's worth keep
trying like try to have conversation try
to bring them into the conversation how
much have you tried right like have you
really had enough attempts at a
conversation a true conversation where
you didn't get frustrated too right like
where you were like okay I understand
that you have this is a difficult
conversation that we're going to have
and I understand you might have feelings
about it but I love you and I really
want to try to have this conversation
and to keep at it and I realize that
that's not easy right that's not easy
I'm not saying it is but I'm saying that
when you're in a relationship that's
worth having that ideally at some point
the other partner will see how much this
matters to you and want to work with you
on it right if they love you if they're
with you there they want what's best for
your relationship they're not like
hiding they're not hiding their head in
the sand and being like Oh I'm like
they're they realize they're just don't
want to talk about it they they they're
not stupid they just sort of don't want
to talk about it because it's
embarrassing to them they feel like
they're the one that has something wrong
with them maybe or maybe they have an
issue that they haven't brought up maybe
they're having a lot of pain with sex or
maybe they're going through hormonal
changes and their tissues are really dry
or whatever there there's a whole host
of things that could be going on that
they don't feel comfortable talking to
you about so I think it's it's valuable
to say is there something I'm not doing
like tell me what you feel about sex
like leaving it open-ended to really
find out what's going on with them
because usually not that they're like I
just don't want to have sex and that's
it there's usually a lot more to it it's
so hard for us to know isn't it when it
comes to sex what the root cause of the
issues are and I think some Rel ships
are like a frog in a frying pan the frog
in the frying pan analogy for anybody
that doesn't know is this old tale about
a frog jumping into a frying pan and
then because the water heat up gradually
it ends up dying but if the water was
hot from the moment it Dr jumped in it
would have jumped straight out the idea
that it's a gradual death for the Frog
and in relationships it's kind of a slow
day by day month by month decline in
intimacy and you end up finding yourself
like a dead frog in a frying pan you end
up finding yourself in a sexless
relationship and you think how the hell
did we get here mhm um and it's and it's
it feels like a long way back from that
point it is it's going to be right
because you let it sort of dwindle and
you didn't talk about it and it's going
to take work and I think that's the key
is like if you want to fight for that in
your relationship it's going to take
work and it's going to take um buy in on
both sides right you have to work for
anything in your relationship
relationships are not easy right you
want to have children that takes work
you want to um decide toy a house
together that takes work deciding and
figuring out the what kind of house you
want how much money you want to spend
like there's all sorts of things that
take work and this is one that people
just don't know how to talk about and so
they just ignore it because it's harder
to bring up for both parties right what
the one who maybe is not wanting sex or
is being the one who says no to and the
one who always wants sex and then feels
rejected because they're not getting it
is there a a sort of a difference
between men and women's sexual desire as
we age you know cuz I think there's a
myth that says men just always want to
have sex and women maybe not so much is
that a real myth um in terms of
something that you hear but also is it
true so let's talk about desire desire
comes in two flavors so there's the
spontaneous desire where you see
somebody you like oh man they're so
attractive I can't wait to sleep with
them I'm immediately turned on I want to
have sex right now right you didn't have
to do anything you just saw them and it
happened and then there's responsive
desire where you're sort of with them
you might be touching them you might not
really be thinking about sex but like
you're touching them you're with them
you're like oh this feels sort of nice I
sort of like this like oh now I'm turned
on after we've sort of started being a
little romantic with each other being a
little more intimate with each other and
both desires are normal and both desires
are fine to have now in the literature
you'll find that men tend to more often
have spontaneous desire and women tend
to more often have responsive desire
particularly when you're in longer term
relationships so there's this disconnect
right women are like why don't I see you
and want to jump you anymore right I
used to feel like this but I don't
anymore what's wrong with me am I broken
right and then they don't realize that
okay maybe we'll just like be together
and let's see what happens and they
don't even want to start because they're
worried that what if I don't want to
have sex and we've now initiated this
like touching cuddling thing where oh
that person's getting really turned on
what if I don't get turned on and what
if I just appoint them and so there's a
lot of charged emotions there but
realizing that this is normal and common
and responsive desire is not wrong it's
just different and people just don't
know that it exists because again media
attention is like you see someone who
jump them you're you're horny right away
you have sex and that's not what happens
all the time and that's okay and so like
you know you can be with your partner
like look I have no expectations from
you I just want to be with you
physically and see if it turns into sex
so often we'll give people homework like
put it on the calendar put it on the
calendar that you are going to be
intimate together at this time and I
know that sounds weird right like you're
looking at me like I'm crazy but we put
on the calendar when we want to work out
we put on the calendar when we want to
have brunch with our friends we put on
the calendar when whatever right and
when we were younger when we used to
have dates with people we would say okay
we're going to go on a date on Friday
night we would know that sex is on the
table with our partner on Friday night
so we'd get really excited about it we
like okay I'm going to shave I'm going
to look real pretty I'm going to smell
good I'm going to do all the things that
make me desirable and feel confident and
be ready to have sex right and so you'd
be like really excited about and then
you would have all this anticipation
about how fun it's going to be but the
anticipation can can wreak havoc content
it can it can so the opposite is true
but that's because if you expect that's
why I say intimacy and not sex so if you
say you're going to have sex it can be
like oh my God what if I don't perform
what if I don't do right what if I don't
want sex what if it hurts right so you
can also have that sort of rumination
and spiral but if you're like look all
we're going to do is be together and be
intimate we're not going to just go have
dinner and talk we're going to like
literally be together not have our
phones with us maybe like touch each
other maybe get undressed maybe just you
know feel what it feels like and that's
it there's no expectation of sex from
either side we're going to go in knowing
that and then slowly work our way
towards like okay you know what like
maybe sex will happen and maybe it won't
and over time as you keep putting it on
the calendar prioritizing your intimate
y with your partner then eventually
you'll get to a point where oh you
remember you recall that connection you
used to have and then you can actually
find that Joy again of connecting
sexually that's the sort of the aspect
of desire which is I guess is a bit more
psychological but it there's also sort
of a physiological element to desire as
it relates to hormones levels so if
someone's got a low libido is that a
hormone dysfunction it can be so
testosterone is the most notorious
hormone for desire right in both men and
women and I think this is a big
misconception is that we don't talk
about testosterone in women but
testosterone in women is more
predominant than actually estrogen we
have more testosterone in our bodies
than we do estrogen and testosterone is
very important for desire in both men
and women but anything that is interacts
with testosterone is also important so
thyroid hormone can can cause issues
with testosterone prolactin which is
another hormone made by the brain can
also interact with testosterone so
essentially evaluating those things and
making sure that your levels are normal
or appropriate for your age can be
helpful that's probably the number one
thing but the other thing outside of
physiology is that stress even though
stress is um sort of an abstract thing
stress affects our physiology right so
when you have a lot of stress in life
whether it be work relationship stress
kids stress whatever it is right it
raises your cortisol level and when your
cortisol level is high you can't produce
testosterone it goes down
and so if you're chronically stressed
which many of us are right you spend
like in today's modern society chronic
stress is like a real problem then that
is going to really impact your libido so
yeah your hormones may suffer because of
it but if you don't fix the stress like
you're not going to fix the root cause
of the problem can I just inject myself
with loads of testosterone though to get
my libido back it won't work for
everybody so if it's not truly a low
testosterone meaning you have normal of
testosterone likely your testosterone
receptors are completely saturated more
testosterone is not going to fix the
problem so it depends on your individual
level of hormones but at some point more
is not better in fact more can be
dangerous and so it's really dependent
on your individual level so giving
yourself like if I give a guy who has
completely normal testosterone levels
both free and total testosterone all
completely normal and I give him
testosterone probably nothing's going to
change because his testosterone
receptors are already fully saturated
with testosterone so more is not going
to do anything what are the other ways
that I can increase my testosterone if I
go and get tested and it says that I
have low testosterone levels and I don't
want to just inject myself with
testosterone Are there natural ways that
I can increase it absolutely so number
one is sleep so sleep is really really
important for testosterone we know that
when you reduce the amount of sleep you
have so for example you sleep less than
six five or 6 hours you're going to have
at least 10 to 15% reduction in
testosterone and so because our body
follows a Circ Rhythm and so when your
testosterone's highest is in the morning
and it starts to decline over the course
of the day there's a little bit of a
bump again and then it goes back down at
night time it's low and your body when
it's sleeping replenishes that
testosterone and so if you're getting
either less number of hours of sleep or
poor quality sleep meaning you're you
know you're not feeling very rusted when
you wake up that's a sign of poor
quality sleep both of those things can
dramatically affect your testosterone
the other thing that you can do is
exercise and specifically resistance
exercise so doing High the the largest
muscle group so usually the lower
extremities and using those have been
shown to boost testosterone more
significantly than any other type of
exercise in fact when you do
cardiovascular high-intensity
cardiovascular endurance training so say
you're doing Ultram man marathons all
the time long long bike rides long
swimming uh you know swimming for a long
periods of time that can actually
increase your cortisol your stress
because your body is having a stress
response and that can actually reduce
your testosterone so it's important to
do cardiovascular exercise aerobic
exercise but in moderation uh because we
do see some people who are great
athletes who you know run you know run
miles and miles and miles but their
testosterone is low because they've been
doing this chronic long duration
endurance exercise so sort of hit
training is fine but it's when you start
doing these big Iron Man thousand M run
things that the cortisol sues that's not
that's not a large percentage of people
right but it's certainly you know it's
like I'm so healthy I'm the healthiest I
could ever be and I'm having low
testosterone why is that and what about
food and testosterone so food you know
there is a lot of uh data on food the
one but the most data is on the
Mediterranean diet and that's because
that's the most well studied in medicine
but essentially having vegetables fruit
low um low amounts of processed foods
good healthy fats nuts and seeds so a
lot of people don't realize but you need
good fat to have testosterone
testosterone is a pre is a production is
in the cholesterol Pathways and so it
comes from those Pathways and so you
need to have some level of fat if you
have too low fat of a diet that'll also
affect your affect your testosterone so
ideally what I tell people is while
there's lots of data on different types
of diets the important thing to know is
you want to avoid processed foods avoid
avoid a lot of sugar and have good
healthy fats in your diet what about you
know I've heard a few times that
testosterone levels have been declining
over the last couple of decades in men
MH is this true yes it is true so we're
not only seeing a decline in
testosterone levels but we're seeing a
decline in sperm quality and uh sperm
numbers so the concentration of sperm
and over the course of the last 50 years
and there's a lot of reasons for that
one is that you know Society has become
more sedentary we're seeing people less
acve getting more and more metabolic
conditions like diabetes high blood
pressure these conditions then cause
endocrinologic abnormalities they cause
problems with blood flow and all these
things can affect the quality of your
sperm as well as the quality of your
testosterone production and then also
there's more we think in the
environments we know there's more uh
microplastics and more endocrine
disrupting chemicals right in the
environment so that is probably a role
now we don't have like exact qu like
exact quantitative data on that but we
think that is probably playing a role
and reducing the exposure to these
endocrine disrupting chemicals so we
tell people try not to drink out of
plastic water bottles try to warm up
food and glass and avoid plastic I mean
these are easy things you can do but if
you want to stress about the amount of
Plastics in the environment like there's
not much you can do as on an individual
level so I tell people do the things you
can control and the other things sort of
you know we have to work on as a society
that's really interesting cuz I I don't
think I think about this much but
removing chemicals from my life in terms
of
what these kinds of things that I'm
holding the metal mug in front of me and
then the plastic bottles I drink from
could be having an impact on my
testosterone and my sperm count it could
I mean like it's not everybody right
think about how many people drink from
plastic water bottles but if you can
decrease your exposure right it's
probably additive so the more exposure
you have the more likely it is to imp
impact your body how do they know this
like how does anybody know that
chemicals are having an impact on our
sperm and testosterone so there's you
know there's basic science research
where they're looking at the impact of
these things on on rats and other
animals and then also they're looking on
the amount of exposure uh to things like
phalates and labs and seeing how that
you know we can't it's all cause it's
all correlation we can't say it's
causitive because we don't we're not
going to do a randomiz study where you
drink from water bottles for 10 years
and you drink from glass water bottles
for 10 years and let's see what happens
right that hasn't been done but they can
say okay the more your exposure based on
whatever biomarker we can assess so
maybe urinary phalates or other things
we can say that okay these people who
have more exposure to this are more
likely based on the data to have lower
levels of testosterone and then you know
looking at the mechanisms of how they
interact with the production of
testosterone and I'm not an expert in
those areas but certainly there has been
sort of plot ible mechanisms of how
these things work how has sperm count
been decreasing over the years so if you
look at the last 50 years you'll see
that the average sperm count has
declined almost
50% and luckily the average sperm count
is still high enough for fertility rates
the average sperm count is probably
around 50 million of of fathers people
who father children and so it's still
above that but it's certainly
significantly lower than it was 50 years
ago and so that's where we're thinking
you know it's it's probably more of a
Global Environmental Factor that's
contributing to that in addition to this
increase in comorbidities and poor
health over time I mean the direction of
travel there is deeply concerning
because if something declines 50% in the
last what 50 years did you say then if
we go forward another 50 years and we
assume the same rate of decline that
means we'll be at 25% of where we were
100 years ago yeah and then what if you
can't father children anymore and what
if you can't have offspring that will
then propagate the species right so
there's there's certainly concerns there
and I think you know we have to as a
society do better in terms of the things
that we can so we can control diet we
can control exercise we can control
those things there's certain things that
we can't but we can try to control what
our people are exposed to and that can
be on a governmental level right like
having sort of laws in place so we know
in the US there's less restrictions
whereas in other countries there's more
restrictions on things like food
coloring and dyes that may have again I
don't I don't know the specifics but
certain you know there's certainly more
restrictions in other countries than in
the US for some reason and so maybe
there needs to be a more critical
evaluation of where we can actually put
in place some things that would actually
have more wide widespread changes when
we think about sperm count we often
think about fertility um and you know I
don't know whether this is just because
Society has changed and we're trying to
have kids later but it does seem that
people are struggling more and more with
fertility I mean even in my own sort of
Circle of Friends um there's you know
there's a couple people that have
reported to be struggling with fertility
or that you know they're spending 12
months or 24 months trying to have
children do you think this is linked to
this as well it could be I mean when we
know when we look at fertility we know
that about half of fertility is due to
women half fertility is due to men and
then some combination of the two right
so um definitely as women age fertility
goes down and we know women are waiting
longer to have children so that's a big
part of it that Society has changed
women are working and and prioritizing
their careers not a bad thing but it
certainly will affect fertility and and
then yeah there may be these issues that
are affecting male sperm counts that are
also causing issues but I don't know
that there's been updated data in terms
of what are the causes or the numbers in
terms of fertility rates fertility aside
is there any correlation between our
health outcomes and our sperm volume not
volume but concentration
uh so volume is the amount of of of
right so concentration of sperm in the
semen is more of a predictor in terms of
um sperm volume not seamen volume let's
be clear so sperm volume sperm
concentration are sort of the the
biomarkers and we would say that yes
there is a correlation with overall
health in terms of uh sperm
concentration and sperm volume uh but I
think I don't want to make people
worried that if they truly have a male
fat Factor infertility then now their
overall health is uh is a problem but
it's certainly important to be evaluated
and seen by your doctor regularly and on
that point of um seamen volume is there
a way to increase that and is it similar
to what you said about increasing
testosterone or is there another set of
sort of um practices we can do to
increase our seamen volume yeah so
seamen volume is variable depending on
the biggest one is how long has it been
since you last ejaculated right so the
longer you delay between one ejaculation
to the other the more seamen volume you
will get that's probably the most
predictive you know hydration can play a
role if you hydrate more certainly you
may see more seam in volume um sometimes
it's a it's a low seam in volume because
you're actually having less force of
ejaculation so interestingly when you're
young the force of ejaculate can be
really really strong it can be up to 30
to 60 cm away like when you ejac that's
how forceful it can be as you age after
about 50 it can decline to 15 to 30 cm
away and so that can feel like you're
having less volume because it's less
forceful and so in those cases that's
because of the pelvic floor muscles that
are around the urethra those muscles
there that help sort of propel the
ejaculate out and so you can strengthen
those muscles with again pelvic floor
exercises like keigle exercises I
caution people because people always
like oh they're going at these Keele
exercis are great they're going to
increase orgasm they're going to make my
semen Propel further and I think that's
fine if you're not having pain you're
not having discomfort and you're doing
them correctly because sometimes what we
see is it can actually cause harm if
your pelvic floor is tense like we
talked about earlier or it can cause
pain and dysfunction if you're tensing
tensing tensing and not relaxing and so
if you don't know how to do them
correctly then you could actually harm
yourself um but yes they can improve
seam and volume by the parameter of
increasing the force of a jackulate and
getting more ecate out that may be left
over if you're not having as forceful of
a muscular contraction does
masturbating improve my pelvic floor
does it strengthen my pelvic floor so
that's a good question the orgasm is
what improves your pelvic floor so if
you masturbate in your orgasm when you
orgasm your pelvic floor contracts
involuntarily you can't do anything
about it at a rate of about every 08
seconds so it does contract and that is
sort of like a pelvic floor muscle
exercise but it's doing it involuntarily
it's Contracting for anywhere from 5 to
60 seconds usually on average and so you
are sort of in that way increasing
pelvic floor strength in fact they've
looked at um in women particularly is
orgasming as good as doing pelvic floor
exercises and they've seen that you know
you can see pretty measurable
Improvement in pelvic floor strength if
you orgasm regularly um is it and it may
be you know as good as doing ke gos
depending on how often you're doing it
so yes orgasm itself can be very
beneficial for pelvic floor strength one
of the big sort of myths that I've
always ways I'm yet to answer is the
impact that our technology is having on
our genitals you know there's kind of
like a pervasive myth that if you put
your phone next to your testicles your
sperm Count's going to drop like
whenever I'm in the car um and I don't
know I'm I'm sat there or I'm sat at
home somewhere and I get my phone and I
put it near my genitals my girlfriend
has a go at me and she she like pulls it
out or tells me to pull it out because I
think she's worried that we're not going
to have kids if it's down there yeah
yeah so there is there is a little bit
of data there in terms of you know when
you have these devices like in your lap
or near your genitals they will increase
the temperature and so when you the the
the testicles are in the scrotum for a
reason right it's because they need this
very perfect environment with this
specific temperature to create sperm and
anything that disrupts that temperature
can cause diff cause abnormalities in
sperm production so for example when you
have a fever because you have the flu or
you have a cold
people will get their sperm checked
their seman analysis and they will see
that their sperm count is zero because
the temperature the fever has
temporarily stopped their sperm
production and so you can see that you
know people also discuss like oh what
about boxers or briefs what about
putting and so all of these things can
increase the temperature around the
scrotum which can then cause changes in
sperm production so I tell patients
particularly if you're trying to have
babies is put your phone in your back
pocket in your chest pocket don't put
your computer or your laptop right on
your lap right I mean it's easy enough
to do and it does increase temperature
so absolutely yes these things can not
for everybody right there's people so we
say people like you shouldn't smoke a
lot of marijuana when you're trying to
get pregnant because marijuana can cause
problems with sperm production but
you'll see people who smoke every day
and they still have babies or you'll see
people who do all of these things right
they they wear briefs they they put
their phone on their in their pocket
they put their laptop on their lap and
they still have babies so it's not a all
allomer but certainly things that you
can easily just avoid putting near your
genitals well if I'm in the sauna every
day or if I'm in a a steam room every
day isn't that going to have an impact
on my sperm count yeah it does and it's
interesting because there's I think
we'll see more of this as we're seeing
the rise of I there's benefits to saunas
no doubt but as we're seeing the rise of
people really doing saunas all the time
um there can be so we tell people when
they're trying to have if they're having
fertility issues don't in hot tubs don't
go in saunas because it could affect
your sperm production so those are sort
of the the conservative things we tell
people to do interesting and this this
point about the phone next to genitals
it's not because of like the Wi-Fi and
the Bluetooth are going to like zap my
babies no I mean there's some there's
some question about that but we don't
know I don't think we know but we know
there's a temperature increase right
because phones get hot we talked about
masturbation briefly um one of the big
questions that people often ask me when
I'm speaking to someone that has
expertise on sexual health is is about
masturbation and whether it decreases
your testosterone levels so it does not
there is one study and it was done in 10
men who abstained from masturbating for
21 days and these are young healthy men
right and so this is where I think
everyone gets their data from is this
one study and so they took their
testosterone before they took their
testosterone after and and what they
found was that there was an increase by
about 50 50 nanog per deil 0.5 um was
which is 50 nanograms per D which is not
a huge amount um at 21 days but we know
that testosterone changes all the time
and two there's a lot of anticipatory
cues when you've been waiting to
masturbate for 21 days like your brain
is is really excited there's all these
like okay I'm finally going to get to
release and that in of itself can
increase testosterone So gener speaking
there's no empiric evidence that is
convincing high quality level evidence
that masturbating or abstaining from
masturbation will increased testosterone
and so there you know people do report
other benefits and so I tell people if
you're getting other benefits from
abstaining by all means go ahead but
don't do it for don't like White Knuckle
it to gain some theoretical increase in
testesterone that one was not even that
large and two is probably not going to
be proven in a larger sample what about
the opposite then is too much
masturbation going to have an adverse
effect on us for men and women yeah so I
think it you know what I tell people is
masturbation is generally safe as long
as you are not masturbating to the point
where you are now choosing to masturbate
over doing anything else so you're
choosing to masturbate rather than have
sex with your partner you're choosing to
masturbate over going to work or you're
I'm going to be a little late to work
because I want to finish masturbating or
you literally can't sleep without
masturbating every day like those sort
you become reliant on this particular
activity for the enjoyment that it
provides um that's when it becomes a
problem but if you're using it in terms
of like masturbating to get orgasm and
the benefits of orgasm that I do achieve
from that because maybe my partner
doesn't want to have sex or maybe I have
more of a sex drive than my partner or I
don't have a partner like let's be
realistic like if you don't have a
partner you're going to have to if you
want to orgasm you're probably going to
have to masturbate and so I think the
problem also comes in is when people
only masturbate the same way every time
they only watch a certain type of erotic
film or they do the same thing every
time and their body habituates to that
and then they have difficult time
climaxing with a partner because they
can't replicate what they're doing
whether what they're watching or how
they're doing it with a partner are we
teaching ourselves something there are
we teaching ourselves how we're aroused
and how we orgasm yeah your brain is
very powerful right so when you're doing
the same thing every time your body is
like oh this is what turns me on this is
what makes me orgasm and then when
you're their partner you're like oh I'm
not getting that same kind of
stimulation and so it doesn't happen to
a lot of people but I would say
certainly I see people where this does
happen and so um you know you have to
sort of take a break and and sort of
re-evaluate and try different things and
get your body to habituate to different
things which takes a little bit of work
um but sort of keeping it varied can be
helpful another big myth masturbation
will make me go blind yeah no there's
literally I don't know where that came
from there's like hariry Pals blindness
like I don't know where I I think this
is all sort of like from religious
rhetoric that says you know you should
not masturbate um and and it you know
where that came from you know as a whole
other story I think what do you think of
this idea of no nut
November yeah so I think it's I'm not a
fan the reason being is because I think
it makes people feel like it's something
they have to do and if you want to like
I said if you find benefit from
abstaining from ejaculating for 30 days
or 28 days or whatever it is um then by
all means like go ahead if you want to
try something there's no harm in it but
I think a lot of people what they do is
they feel like it's something that's
going to bring them to some higher level
and they're going to become this great
person because they're able to to to
conquer this goal but they're like
literally miserable so they're um
they're clenching their pelvic floor all
the time because they're stressed about
how they're not ejaculating they may
ejaculate at night and so they'll have a
nocturnal emission and then they'll feel
so bad because theyve failed it's
nothing you can control nocturnal
emissions are physiologic they're
totally normal and 86% of men have had a
wet dream at some point in their
lifetime like it's very very common and
and more likely the longer you are from
ejaculating so um your body will take
care of the ejaculate if you ejaculate
or not so you will either resorb the
semen or you'll ejacate at night and so
if you want to do it because you feel
like okay I have a challenge I want to
conquer it I want to see if I can do
this and you feel better because you're
not you're able to like not focus on
sexual thoughts or you're able to really
um find some other level of spirituality
or something by all means go ahead I
don't have a problem with it what I have
a problem with is making people feel bad
because they can't do it or they don't
want to do it and with people feeling
forced or feeling like they need to do
it to prove something to someone else
yeah because I mean the way that I've
had it explained to me is that it's some
something about seman retention gives
you some clarity of mind or something
because a lot of athletes before they
have their their big fights or you know
their bigger sort of Olympic
competitions they'll abstain from
masturbation I often hear in the UFC for
example the um the mixed martial arts
fighting championship that athletes have
not had sex or not ejaculated for two
weeks before a fight or four weeks
before a fight yeah so there's a lot of
rhetoric there I think that comes from
um historical so even in Greek in Greek
times they would tell people to avoid
having sex or masturbating prior to you
know big fights or or just whatever
sport they were playing and so is it
true in data so if you look at the
studies that have looked at people
performing athletic Feats whether it's
like cycling or running or whatever ever
um they have not found that abstaining
from ejaculation actually changes their
ability to perform and so in those cases
I say well there's no true scientific
evidence that we have that it's going to
improve and in fact if you are someone
who for example has sex every morning or
masturbates every morning for whatever
reason that's a part of your routine
disrupting the routine can actually be
harmful to Performance and sometimes the
the one thing you can say is in terms of
disrupting performance is that after you
masturbate you do see an increase in
heart rate a little bit um you have a
rebound so it decreases and then you
have a rebound increase in heart rate
that can slightly affect your ability to
recover from performance But ultimately
I think if you find benefit from it
because people report feeling more
aggressive with abstaining then by all
means if you find it helpful I think
it's fine but is it mandatory I don't
think so based on the evidence we have
right now cuz I I heard that rumor many
years ago and I think I assumed it was
correct I heard the rumor and this was
of evolutionary story that was attached
to the rumor was that once upon a time
when we were out I don't know looking
for um a sexual partner we would need to
be more articulate and more persuasive
and more I don't know attractive
basically so we were optimal
attractiveness before we ejaculated then
after we've ejaculated that kind of
energy goes out of us and recharges and
rebuilds again so I was when I heard
that I thought okay so if I'm speaking
on stage or I'm doing a podcast I want
to make sure that I'm you know my mouth
and my brain are attached I'm articulate
I'm persuasive whatever I need to be so
don't ejaculate or masturbate anytime
before doing anything where I need to
use my brain in my mouth well you know
some people describe post not Clarity
right so they actually on the
alternative feel like and there's no
good data on this the data we have is on
people the very small subset of people
who have post nut postcoidal not post
nut postcoidal dysphoria so they
actually feel bad but in terms of
clarity um you know some people do like
when you're trying to You're motivated
to get a partner right you're sort of um
trying to uh woo them you're really
focused on that one singular effort that
once you've obtained that that the like
very singular focus goes away and now
other parts of your brain can be
activated to then be used for some
people will describe being more
productive more able to get work done
after um masturbation it's very
individualized or ejaculation whatever
it is post that Clarity I've never heard
anybody talk about this before and I've
also been told over the years that it's
something that just men experience
predominantly and for anyone that
doesn't not post nut Clarity is the
definition that I understand is and that
I have experienced I'm going to be
honest is that after ejaculation your
desire for the other person reduces
quite significantly and there's a
stereotype here that women don't
experience this post-nut Clarity in the
same way now if I ask all of my male
friends if I said to them has there ever
been a time in your life where you were
maybe texting someone you were attracted
to or you know had some sort of sexual
attraction to and then you
masturbated did your desire um diminish
after you masturbated for that person
that you were just texting I think about
90% of my male friends would say yes yes
and they describe it as if someone like
took some like sunglasses off them like
a pretty extreme Sudden Change and I've
always wondered about this whether this
is just men if it's just women why it
happens so when you look at brain
studies right of people having orgasm
and what happens is when you have an
orgasm like your whole brain lights up
right because your heart rate goes up
your blood pressure goes up like your
pupils down so all these different parts
of your body are working so your whole
brain lights up and then after orgasm it
it it gets very like quiet and so we see
that in women it may take a little
longer to get really quiet in men it
happens very quickly and this may be
associated with sort of the hormonal
changes that occur after orgasm so we
know that prolactin increases after
orgasm dopamine decreases is and there's
sort of some evolutionary theories about
why this happens so one is after you
ejaculate if you are having uh
ejaculation with a woman then you don't
want to have sex again to then same
thing with the refractory period right
that there's some period of time where
you're not going to want to have sex
again or you can't have sex even if you
want to and this is because
evolutionarily if you deposited your
ejaculate into a woman if you then had
sex again you could actually dislodge
the semen and then you would have less
ability to uh to have fertilizing egg
right and then the other thought is that
you don't want to become overly
exhausted right so that if you if you
had the unlimited capability to have sex
over and over again that exhaustion
could be a real thing like and so you're
sort of a protective mechanism um and so
those are sort of the theories as to why
this is and there is like an absolute
refractory time where like you don't
want sex at all and then there's a
relative refractory time where if you
had a really novel or strong stimulus
for sexual activity that you would be
able to um in terms of clarity in ter
because we know there's a little bit of
differences in brain um it may not be as
obvious in women in terms of it takes
them a little longer to have that coming
down after the orgasm from the brain
activity um but probably there is some
we just haven't studied enough and I I
always say this that when we look at
studies for women's sexual health and
men's Sexual Health they're so lopsided
so if you type in penis in like a in
like a search engine for Google or for
the PubMed which is where you look up
research articles you're going to find
50,000 articles if you look up clitoris
you're going to get 2,000 articles so
it's very lopsided in terms of what we
study um for sexual function and in in
of itself sexual function by many people
is not seen as mandatory or important
for health and so the funding is less
often available for sexual health that's
why we have such little data in some
areas going back to just closing off on
the point about masturbation is there a
link between m masturbation and prostate
cancer because I've I've heard a lot of
different things about it um some people
think that over masturbation is causing
prostate cancer and some people say the
opposite yeah so there's actually a
really good study um that was done
looking at ejaculation frequency and
prostate cancer and it was a very well
done they tried to control for a lot of
other factors and so what they found was
that men who ejaculated 21 times or more
a month were less likely to develop
prostate cancer this is just a
statistical number it is not a number
that sort of um means anything in terms
of but we're seeing that like okay so
more masturbation may help why is that
right so there may there's a prostate
stagnation hypothesis that the fluids
that you know some of your ejaculate
fluids come from the prostate and so
when you're e jackling frequently you're
more often getting rid of that fluid and
sort of re replenishing it or cleaning
the pipes so to say so that may be
beneficial in terms of preventing
prostate cancer now do you have to
masturbate or ejaculate or have sex 21
times a month um no but you know there
could be a benefit yes and so uh having
a healthy and it may be that those
people who had sex more often or jacine
more often were just healthier in other
ways right they were able to have sex
more often or masturbate more often
because they were uh s you know
sufficiently healthy to do so and so I
while they tried to control for those
things there's always sort of
uncontrollable variables that come into
those sort of studies yeah that's what I
was wondering is is there another like
glaringly obvious factor that those
people had more relationships therefore
their mental health was better therefore
X Y and Z they tried to control for
comorbidities but again they're they're
I don't think they controlled for I mean
they control for marriage I believe um
but I'm not sure that they controlled
for like in a relationship versus not
and how healthy that relationship is
that certainly wasn't assessed I'll link
to the study below so everyone can read
for themselves about the um the controls
in that study and how that was conducted
link to this is is the subject of
um it was interesting cuz I was doing a
lot of research on the subject of that
sounds a bit strange I was doing a lot
of research on the subject of porn and
where conversations at with the subject
and one of the quite startling things is
a lot of people are trying to figure out
how to stop watching porn um a lot of
people are asking
themselves for mechanisms to um install
things on their computer that prevent
porn time and um searching for Solutions
around porn addiction and a lot of
people were searching um about whether
porn is a sin and I think there's
something broader here about the idea of
Shame which is linked to porn what is
your take on on this is porn a bad thing
yeah so I don't think porn is a bad
thing I will start with that um is it a
sin is more of a moral question right
and I think that that is uh something
that you individually have to decide for
yourself if you feel like morally it's
inappropriate but it's It's
Entertainment right it's just a
different form of entertainment and I
think the issues with porn um because I
would not say that it's 100% great I
think there are definitely issues with
it one the big one that I've been very
vocal about is children seeing
pornography so um we know now that the
average age of a boy seeing pornography
is 13 and that's the average meaning
that as young as 8 to 10 boys are being
exposed to pornography um which was not
the case when for example we were
growing up right you had to I I always
say this you had to find a a tape maybe
find a VC are in a room that nobody was
going to walk in or you had to find a
magazine and hide it somewhere and go
find it and so it was not readily
available you had to work to be able to
see that and now seeing pornography is
very readily available and so uh very
often kids are seeing it whether you as
a parent don't want them to whether
you've put blocks on their phones and
devices um they may have access to it
from a friend or they may see it
somewhere else and um and your brain is
not fully developed to understand one
what you're seeing and two to understand
that this is not real unless your parent
has talked to you about you know this is
sort of a a movie that's not real life
and this is not what sex is really like
and so I think that has um implications
for um for how they view sex and how
they then try to have sex with partners
and also you know because your brain's
not fully developed you're getting this
big rush of dopamine from viewing
something like that and that's not
something that we traditionally got at
that age right and so it can become
become very addictive now as an adult I
think it's different because you have a
fully formed brain you understand the
concept of this is not real most people
um and so it can be just a way to have
pleasure and even watch it with your
partner and have pleasure um but yes we
are seeing some people who have
problematic pornography use in the
literature they say it's 4% I suspect
maybe it's a little higher now or people
are finding that watching pornography is
is one easier than going out trying to
find a partner you don't have to face
rejection you don't have to face the
difficulties and awkwardness of having a
first a sexual encounter with someone
that often happen and so it can become a
way because it does relieve dopamine
just like anything else release dopamine
it can then become sort of a way to feel
better about anything right like you can
just be feeling down like I want to
watch pornography because it makes me
feel better it may not be just that
you're really into sex it's just that
you're really like wanting that Rush hit
of dopamine um and then there's
obviously this shame that comes with oh
my God why am I using pornography just
because I feel bad and then you're like
oh but I feel bad and so I'm going to
use porn again and it becomes this sort
of like negative vicious cycle that can
occur but I think when used for
entertainment and pleasure I think it's
fine and many many people use it for
entertainment and pleasure without a
problem I the other day bought the Apple
Vision Pro that new headset and I tell
you what Jesus Christ that's
unbelievable piece of technology this
one feature they have on their is called
spatial video and I don't know if you've
tried it yet but you put it on and if
you've taken a spatial video which you
can now take on the new iPhone and also
on the Vision Pro it basically feels
like a 3D video and it's like nothing
I've ever experienced before one of our
team members commented that you know
they they lost a family member and they
wish they had this because it it's like
the person is back in front of you it's
not like a photo or a video anymore but
then little monster in my mind goes hm
there's going to be other applications
of this technology as it relates to put
graphy and we're getting you know if we
just assume any rate of improvement with
this technology just I know 5% a year we
eventually get so close to being
indistinguishable from a human being
that the incentive structure of going
out and getting a day and you know for
the for the objective of having sex or
whatever versus just popping your
headset on which is going to get cheaper
and cheaper and cheaper and better and
better and better um becomes really
lopsided I it's so clear to me
that if we just go forward 10 years and
we're on the Apple Vision Pro 17 air
there's going to be so many people that
are using that as a way to uh masturbate
and to watch
pornography and there and it's going to
reduce the amount of people that are
seeking real Intimate Relationships IRL
in the real world yeah it is a real
concern I would say but you know we know
from some data that people will find
physical touch particular particularly
in like hair bearing areas um very
important in terms of intimacy with a
partner so um Intimacy in general and so
I I can only hope that that will
continue that you will want physical
touch because no matter what you can see
with your eyes um it's not touching you
it's not like it's still you doing the
touching there's no element of surprise
or excitement or buildup in terms of
like there's someone else in the room
with you right so I can only hope that
that that will that will be the case but
it still remained to be seen however I
will show that there's some interesting
um applications of this in terms of fear
so if you are really scared of something
you can actually desensitize yourself
using these VR headsets and it can
actually be very powerful so I was just
speaking to a researcher Lori BR about
how they're using it in their lab for
women who have fear of penetration
because they've had either trauma or
they have other conditions that are
causing it to be painful and so they can
work with them to be using these
headsets to simulate a sexual experience
and then they can sort of use a DI like
use a tool or a dilator or something to
then penetrate in a safe space right not
like you're with a partner and you're
like trying to have sex and you're you
know you don't feel very safe sort of
allowing that it's very preliminary
research but I think ultimately there
are some positive things that maybe will
come out of the use of these sort of VR
our headsets and I can only hope that
that will predominate and we can
continue and people will inherently want
other people right that we're we're
hardwired to be around people and to be
intimate with people like that's how our
brains work so I'm hopeful that that
will that will still remain to be the
case but I can't I can't predict it you
don't look
convinced well you know I mean I think
it's I I am worried you know I think
that phones have changed lives too right
like now our kids our younger generation
doesn't communicate as well because when
they hang out together they're sitting
all together looking at their phones
right and so we have to actively work to
prevent like I make my kids have full-on
conversations with people I say you got
to come and hang out with the adults and
have conversations and and talk to
people and we have to coach them on how
to talk to people um because I worry
that people are too into even when they
hang out with their friends they're
playing on devices right so um I think
there's like work that has to be done to
prevent the the the easy dopamine rushes
that these devices are giving us right
so we actually have to actively work at
it and people are inherently going to
take the route of of the easiest thing
and so as a society we have to sort of
work together to sort of prevent these
easy wins easy things easy dopamines
from taking over something you mentioned
within there though was the idea of
trauma and I've I'm quite interested in
the role that our trauma plays in our
sexual health and sexual
dysfunction what's important to know
there and does trauma play a role at all
in the patients you see absolutely 100%
so your body when it goes through a
trauma it will then sort of your body
remembers even if you don't right so
these people very many people who have
pelvic floor dysfunction meaning their
pelvic floors are too tight or too tense
they've had some sort of trauma not all
of them some of it's just Stress and
Anxiety but sometimes they've had some
sort of trauma years ago and it's been
with I I remember having like a
70-year-old woman and she had such
terrible pelvic Flor dysfunction for God
knows how many years that ultimately it
caused really negative consequences for
her bladder function and um and so
absolutely when you have a trauma that's
unresolved in some shape or form it will
affect you whether it's your mental
health your physiologic health I mean
our brains are so powerful that you know
when it's in a bad place it can affect
you negatively when it's in a positive
place it can affect you more positively
the one thing I will say is if you have
trauma getting therapy getting help to
resolve that trauma is so so important I
talk to all my patients and I say yes
you may have an organic problem meaning
a physiologic bodily problem that's
causing your sexual dysfunction but
everyone who has sexual dysfunction has
a psychologic component because it is
devastating it is stressful it is
horrifying to feel like you're not
normal your body doesn't function
normally especially in an intimate space
like sex so I'm like everybody should
ideally see a sex therapist if it was
available to everybody but it's not
right how can we allow people to have
access to things they need because we
don't teach these things in school right
school I mean this is my big gripe is
like how can we make education better
for children like we need better sexual
education we need better education on
how to resolve traumas or how to deal
with them or how to get help how to do
digital Health like how do you navigate
the world with all this misinformation
how do you find good quality information
how do you assess it like there's so so
many things even how to balance your
books right they don't learn that in
school so ultimately there's so many
things that I think if we were really
putting a critical eye on how we teach
our young people that we could improve
and part of that would be including
people to know and realize when they
need help through whatever trauma
they've suffered or stress or anxiety
that they're suffering and how that can
propagate itself over a lifetime and
create real problems I have to ask this
question cuz people mention this quite
often often can you have sex while
you're pregnant absolutely why not I ask
it because it was one of the most
Googled questions um online really yeah
one of the highest search volumes I've
ever seen for a search term was can you
have sex while pregnant wow I actually
didn't I mean I I I've heard a lot of
things and I think that people feel like
I've heard that men think they're going
to hurt the baby they're going to um
they're going to cause a problem but no
absolutely you can have sex you're not
going to create like a pre-term labor
you're not going to harm the fetus like
nothing bad is going to happen from
having sex while pregnant okay so let's
talk about orgasms and the clitoris then
you mentioned earlier that um there's
disproportionately a lot less research
done on the clitorus as a man what do I
need to know about the clitoris CU I
I'll be honest I know very little I know
where it is that's that's a
plus well not everyone knows that either
yeah I didn't always know where it was I
a couple of misunderstandings but um I
found I found it eventually and I I
think I know how to stimulate it but I
don't really know what's going on there
or how it works okay so what I tell
everybody and what men can think of is
the clitoris is like the penis so when
you are a fetus there's a thing called
the genital tubric before you're
assigned sex that genital tubric when
you're when you become a man that
genital tubric becomes the penis and the
shaft and the glands and in a woman it
becomes the clitoris and the clitoris
actually then goes deep into the pelvis
um just like the penis it has a shaft in
the pelvis and then it goes around the
vaginal canal and so you can the clitus
is just as sensitive as a man's penis
right so if you stimulate the clitoris
like your penis gets stimulated then it
will lead to orgasm and it's probably
the most reliable route for orgasm for
women so 85% of women need some form of
cliteral stimulation to Climax and so
many women have difficulty climaxing
through vaginal penetration alone that's
not that they're broken or something's
wrong with them it's just that they
don't and because the stimulus from the
clitoris is so strong it leads to a very
reliable route for orgasm now how you
stimulate it is sort of very
individually specific but typically oral
stimulation vibratory stimulation uh uh
manual stimulation all those things can
work but that's where the communication
comes in where like the partner ideally
would know what they like and could tell
you um or they you could check like does
this feel good does this feel good do
you like this is this you know or and
you know and so that's sort of again a
challenge because the communication
issue we've talked about this this whole
talk but um that is really what's
important now the clitoris like I said
it it goes um deep above the vagina and
around it so people can still get
clitoral stimulation through penetration
um depending on how you stimulate now
the other areas that are important for
orgasm are the G erogenous Zone it's
actually not a spot it's a Zone and
that's where essentially if you go look
at the vagina on the anterior wall which
is the top of the vagina underneath the
urethra where the PE comes out about 2
to 3 centimeters in is called The gynus
Zone it's named after the person who um
identified it I think it's graen house
or something like that but um
essentially that area is full of certain
nerve endings as well as the female
prostate or the skin glands and so those
are areas that are quite ayous and that
uses a different so the clitoris is
inated by the pudendal nerve the G
erogenous zone is inovated by the
hypogastric nerve so a different nerve
and then the cervix is the last area
where Sometimes women feel a lot of
stimulation and that's a stimulated by
the vagus nerve so all these different
areas can lead to orgasm for women and
they can be additive so if you're
stimulating all three you might have a
more strong orgasm and the orgasm may
feel a little different now people like
to call it like oh you're getting
clitoral orgasm or a vaginal orgasm it's
all an orgasm it's just a matter of what
stimulation is causing the orgasm and so
I think ultimately it's really important
for the the most easy reliable route to
orgasm is cital stimulation which is not
traditionally stimulated through penis
and vagina sex right and so it does
require some additional um thought on
how you're going to stimulate it and and
how you're going to please the partner
and to get them to orgasm and often
times if you think about the time it
takes to orgasm so in a man the average
length if you look at studies that have
looked at stopwatches like they've had
the female partner actually start a
stopwatch at the beginning of sex and
stop it at the end when the man climaxes
it's about 5.1 to 5.7 minutes um which
in fact UK men tend to last a little bit
longer which is sort of an interesting
concept but so which sex is that men men
men so from penetration to climax of men
so when you so when they so they've
measured basically not including
foreplay but if they've measured they've
measured like 15,000 people through many
many different countries and they've had
the woman take a stopwatch and actually
start click on it when they penetrate
and click it off when they Climax and
they've measured the length of time and
it's been about 5.1 to 5.7 minutes is
the time now a woman when you look at
the average time to orgasm for woman
it's about 14 minutes and so you can
imagine that if the entire sexual
encounter is around the male climax
right and the male has this as we've
already talked about sort of this post
nut Clarity like I don't want refractory
time they're not going to want to be
more intimate if you don't prioritize
the female's climax or stimulate her
before you begin to penetrate then she's
probably not going to orgasm um and so
and the interesting thing is when you
look at sexual encounters and you look
at men and women having sex for the
first time uh the woman will orgasm 45%
of the time the man will orgasm 95% of
the time when you look at women having
sex with women on a first time encounter
they both have orgasms 95% of the time
so clearly there's an educational Mis
disconnect right women know what they
like and what stimulates them and men
aren't getting the memo I feel
attacked totally not attacked letting
you know the
facts I know it makes sense though cuz
yeah I think men are still struggling to
understand again because of what you
said we don't really get a sexual
education so we learn these things from
porn and obviously in porn they're not
showing it yeah I mean you don't
typically have many um women orgasming
in porn as you do men orgasming in porn
what is an orgasm and what kind of what
role does it serve like why do we orgasm
and also when I say what is an orgasm is
an orgasm like a switch or is is it like
a spectrum so it's it's sort of like a
spectrum I guess I mean so let's talk
about what it is exactly so an orgasm is
a moment in time that is combined with a
like a a maximal tension and then a
release and during that time it is
completely you're completely unable to
think about anything else it is a very
powerful pleasurable sensation and it
occurs usually like I said 5 to 60
seconds it can last and is it in terms
of how you get it it's usually a
culmination of stimulation over a period
of time even with a certain sort of like
Rhythm that's required to achieve climax
that's different from person to person
so I can't give you the script on this
is how fast you need to penetrate or
this is how what stimulation you need to
use okay that's the end of the
conversation okay we're done here so um
so yeah cuz nobody wants to talk about
they literally want me to tell them like
this is what you do a b c d instru man
so um but yeah ultimately um all of
those things they build this tension
right so over the course of sexual
stimulation arousal you are getting to
an ex excitement phase where your your
body is changing so in women for example
you will see that the labia become a
little bit redder um they expand in size
as I said the vagina lengthens and
elongates um the so the from 3 to six
inches I've heard you say yeah about
about double yeah and it's different
from person that's the average right so
there is sort of like this thought that
like okay if it's really really large
it's always going to be better and
that's not actually all always the case
because not every vagina can accommodate
a very large phus um but so when you're
having orgasm essentially your pelvic
floor muscles are tensing up they're
they're getting really tense and you're
reaching this for like basically you're
getting to the top of the hill you're
getting this really large amount of
climax and so your body is sort of clim
going up and up and up you're reaching
like increasing dopamine and you're
increasing so when you think about what
happens in the brain is your hormones
are Are CL going higher and higher and
there's also an inhibitory there's a
there's a there's a stimulatory and an
inhibitory pathway and so the
stimulatory pathway is going up
inhibitory stimulatory you're basically
trying to race up to the top of this
mountain and once the stimulatory gets
to the very very top then you have the
orgasm and so you release all this
tension and during this time your heart
rate's racing your pupils are dilating
right there's all these physiologic
changes um and then when you orgasm your
muscles contract as I mentioned before
and this every 8 seconds they're having
a contraction sometimes you'll have an
involuntary phonation so people will you
know moan or scream and sometimes it's
not in their control like there's
actually an involuntary component of it
and then um sort of it comes down and so
it's it's not necessarily a switch it's
sort of a a a climb up a mountain is the
way I would describe it sometimes feels
like blowing up a balloon with a little
hole in it and what I say with a little
hole in it I mean because if you stop it
feels like some air comes out of the
balloon mhmh that's why I said the the
sort of there needs to be a rhythm it
should keep going at a certain Pace in
order to achieve that climax cuz if it
doesn't then you can again just like
that's a very good description you'll
lose that little air in the
balloon okay so in order to increase
female pleasure okay we need to
understand the person we're dealing with
of course but um the clitorus is a great
way to get to
orgasm you've you're PR lubricants MH a
lot of people feel like that's not
natural so they kind of avoid it but
you're Pro lubricants and are you Pro
then scheduling sex or you Pro SCH in
time for intimacy scheduling time for
intimacy so because sex ads as we talked
about add sort of like a level of stress
in terms of like am I going to want to
have sex am I going to be able to get an
erection am I going to enjoy sex
whatever it is and am I going to get
rejected like all those things because
you're still a human being and you may
just like be really stressed that day
that you put on the calendar and you
were like a I just can't can't get in
the right mind space to have sex so if
you're constantly ruminating or
stressing about other things you can't
have a good sexual encounter in fact
they've looked at mindfulness in terms
of how it improves sexual function
particularly in women but we've seen
very clear data that be having a
mindfulness practice leads to improved
sexual function in terms of desire and
other factors like arousal and
lubrication and orgasm but the biggest
is desire and so it's because if you can
focus on what's Happening during the
sexual encounter so you can focus on
what it feels like how you're enjoying
that sensation rather than thinking
about am I going to come am I going to
Climax and is it going to happen or
whatever it is that you're thinking
about during sex because you're worried
about how the other partner might react
then you're more likely to enjoy the
experience feel and then have a good
experience and subsequently have more
desire for additional experiences we
talked earlier on the very start of the
conversation about comparisons and how
that can really destroy sex is there a
disparity between how long we think sex
should take and how long it actually
takes yeah we all think it lasts longer
and when you ask people what the average
time and this is a hard question because
people think of sex as a whole encounter
and when we do it scientifically we look
at sex from penetration to the end of
penetration and sex is more diverse
right sex can include oral sex anal sex
um manual sex any type of sexual
stimulation right and so when you're
thinking about the entire encounter it
can be very variable some people want to
quickie some people want to have this
long luxurious love making scenario and
it really depends also like on what's
going on in your life like you may not
have that luxury and so I don't I think
again it's not about reaching a certain
Benchmark or a certain number it's
really about the quality of the sex so
if you have great sex and it takes 3
minutes that's great that's fine but as
long as it's great to both of you right
if you're both like this is awesome I'm
having great sex and it takes three
minutes that's fine but how long do
people think sex lasts on average versus
is how long it actually lasts on average
yeah so I think that most people
definitely think it lasts longer so
women tend we don't know what they think
it lasts but what they want it to be is
about 18 to 25 minutes men are a little
on the shorter side like maybe 12
minutes but generally we all want it to
be around that length but you sort of
lose sense of time right so you don't
really no one's really there with the
stopwatch knowing exactly how long it
takes in fact I've had friends tell me
like oh I watched your video and now
like when my partner wants sex I'm like
oh it's only going to take five minutes
like I can I can have sex with them like
I used to in my head used to think it
would take a lot longer and I realized
it takes less time and like I don't that
that stress of like oh my God I'm going
to have to like waste like half an hour
and I'm so tired like has gone out the
window because I know it's really not
going to take that long is that have
they ever put people in like a
laboratory or whatever and and I guess
this goes back to what you said earlier
um is there like an average time people
spend having sex was that the 5 minutes
you talked about 5.7 minutes 5.1 to 5.7
minutes minutes depending on the study
you look at and they they looked at all
Commerce so it's actually different in
different um countries so when you look
at like turkey it was like four minutes
and if you look at UK it was like 10
minutes so it's
actually thank you so it's actually
variable and that may be a cultural
thing um but ultimately the average is
about five something interesting so we
want sex women want sex to last between
18 and 25 minutes ideally men want it to
last ideally about 16 minutes including
forl but in reality it's lasting five
five minutes yeah that's good to know
let's talk about Zoe who you may know
because they're a sponsor of this
podcast and I'm an investor in the
company you guys know health is my
number one priority Zoe's growth story
has been absolutely incredible so far
they're doing science at a scale that
I've never seen before because of their
members and recent breakthroughs in
research they can now continue to offer
the most scientifically Advanced gut
health tests
on the market previously the test
allowed them to analyze 30 bacteria
types in your gut but now thanks to new
science they've identified a 100
bacteria types this is a huge step
forward and there's nothing else that's
available even close to it on the market
at all so to find out more and to get
started on your Zoe Journey visit
zoe.com
stepen you can use my exclusive code
ceo1 for 10% off don't tell anybody
about that okay just for you guys
we talked about sizes of stuff a second
ago and we said we would come back to
this so there's two sort of sizes that
people often think about the size of the
vagina and the size of the penis there
is a myth in society that the more sex a
woman has the bigger her vagina gets is
that myth true or false false so the way
that women's vaginas get if you want to
say loose right which is the term that
people use or they get a weak pelvic
floor and that's from having babies
having Maybe neurologic conditions that
affect the pelvic floor strength having
collagen disorders having um just from
like having a job where you stand all
day and you're like all the weight of
your body is sitting on your pelvic
floor those muscles can get weaker over
the course of a lifetime and then it can
feel a bit looser because those muscles
are maybe not squeezing as harder but it
is not related to how much sex she's
having because as we mentioned earlier
when you have an orgasm you're actually
like strengthening your pelvic floor a
little bit like you're you're
Contracting those muscles so actually
probably the more sex a woman has likely
her pelvic floor is probably stronger
unless she's not you know um but you
know you add in the having babies and
other things it's variable but probably
the more orgasms a woman has the
stronger her pelvic floor is but things
like child birth can mhm make the pelvic
floor looser weaker weaker yeah yeah so
then when it becomes weak that is the
cause of things like stress incontinence
so when a woman um lifts something heavy
or she exercises or she jumps or she
coughs or sneezes she might have a
couple drops of urine or a lot of urine
leak out because of a weak pelvic floor
it can also be lead to something like
prolapse where the it's like a hernia in
the vagina where the pelvic floor sort
of is so weak that now the vaginal skin
and the organ behind it is sort of
bulging out and can cause discomfort and
and sort of uh feeling maybe some
dysfunction in the organ but really
mostly discomfort and so those are sign
of weak pelvic floors not you know not
having a loose vagina during sex and we
can do something to strengthen our
pelvic floor which is the is that what
the keegle exercises are yeah it's more
than Keel I mean Keel is the most has
the best PR of any sort of thing I've
ever seen in medicine but yeah it's
pelvic floor exercise the Keel is one
pelvic floor exercise which is to
strengthen the pelvic floor and there
are others what is it so it's
essentially men never know like it's
it's not your fault women sort of kind
of know but even don't really know so
what it is is there's those same muscles
we talked about earlier is that you're
basically doing a rep you're squeezing
Contracting and relaxing just go to the
gym right you squeeze and relax very
similarly you are squeezing those
muscles and relaxing those muscles I can
do this sat down now yeah so basically
for men what I tell people is it's like
the feeling of when you're urinating and
you stop your urine stream that that's
you're using those same muscles so
that's one way another way to think
about it is if you were trying to lift
your penis off the ground without
without touching it ah okay go yeah okay
and the third one is you're trying to
hold in a fart so all those different
ways you're sort of getting those
muscles so the one thing I tell people
is they get the way they get it wrong is
they don't relax enough so just like
when you go to the gym you're not doing
rep after rep after rep you're actually
taking a break and you're letting your
muscles relax before you do another rep
same thing you have to squeeze for 5
seconds relax for 5 seconds right you
actually have to um relax and just like
any exercise you don't want to overdo it
so I tell people start lying down so
that the only thing you have to focus on
from a muscular standpoint is that those
muscles as you get good at them lying
down you then do them sitting up and
then as you get good at doing them
sitting up you can do them standing or
do them anywhere but like you're not
going to be like there you know I
remember the scene from Sex in the City
where like the character Samantha was
like I'm doing my Keel right now like
yeah she's probably been doing Keel for
a long time and now she's so good at
them that she can do them while she's
brushing her teeth but it's not like
you're going to wake up one day and be
perfect at them just like any other
exercise so that's one exercise there
are certainly other things you can do to
strengthen your pelvic floor
traditionally things like yoga and
pilates have some core work that does
also help with the pelvic floor but
really I recommend if you're having
issues is to see a pelvic floor physical
therapist CU they're just like a when
you go to the gym alone you can do it or
you can go with the personal trainer
they're like the personal trainers for
your pelvic floor how do I know if I'm
having pelvic floor issues what are the
symptoms so for like I said the obvious
ones for women are leakage are um having
prolapse for weakness in men we don't
often see as much but like I said you
might notice that your semmen is not as
forceful when it comes out um that's
usually the most common side sign of a
weak pelvic floor there's not as many
for men but in terms of a overly um High
tone pelvic floor what we worry about
then is then there's a whole host of
symptoms it could be as simple as just
having lower back pain um it can be that
you're having hip pain it could be that
you're having um pain with sex you're
having pain with erections pain with
ejaculation you're going to the bathroom
often got to go got to go you are
feeling like you're having difficulty
emptying your bladder or you are um
going very very often all of a sudden so
it can be a vague variety of these
symptoms and um so generally it's
important to get evaluated to see like
examine to get your pelvic floor
examined by a professional whether it's
a urologist a gynecologist a a pelvic
floor physical therapist someone who can
assess your pelvic floor
if you're having these issues because it
might be pelvic floor it might not right
how do they assess it if I go to a
urologist and say listen check my pelvic
floor M so in a man it would be a rectal
exam and so essentially that's how you
sort of feel the pelvic floor muscles so
what I tell young guys who come I said
look I can examine you um but I bet
based on your story like you're a young
guy you've sort of had these new
stressors in your life um and it's un
and you're otherwise healthy it's
unlikely that you have a vascular
condition brewing and other things that
like it's probably likely so if you want
to uh avoid the exam because it can be
uncomfortable or and I will tell you if
you have pelvic floor dysfunction and
someone does an exam it will be
uncomfortable it will be painful
potentially because they're pushing on
those already tense muscles and it can
be painful so I tell people like you
might hate me tomorrow because you'll be
sore and you'll say what did she do
during that exam and I I kind of
preemptively tell them because I just
gently push right like I'm pushing the
pad on my finger but that's enough to
sort of C a tension of the pelvic floor
muscle and cause pain where where you
like on the muscles on the pelvic floor
muscles so you can actually so if you if
you put your finger in the rectum if you
push right straight down in a man you're
feeling the prostate and if you push on
the sides at a variety of different
angles you're going to feel different
pelvic floor muscles like the levator
Ani and the trans operator muscles those
muscles are the ones that are part of
the pelvic floor we can't feel all of
them but we can feel some of them and so
um so that is sort of where we're
feeling
in terms of for the pelvic flooor
muscles okay so because I was thinking
if we go in the the rectum you've got
the glutes there as well which are like
either side I guess so your pelvic Flor
is actually a part of your core right
but your glutes are further back they're
not going to be felt from there but
anyways if you think about your pelvic
florids actually you know people think
about their core as they abdominals but
we know that it sort of encompasses your
back your front and even your pelvic
floor is sort of part of your core
muscles got you okay interesting very
interesting in um on the topic of sizes
then one of the big things in men is
penis size M and one of the big
questions men often ask is is there ways
to increase my penis size there's in
fact a whole industry around penis size
increasing pumps and all kinds of
different things is it possible to
increase one's penis size yeah so it is
um in terms of looking at the evidence
uh the safest and most reliable way is
using a traction device and these are
devices that are made for um essentially
for penile lengthening but they're also
made for men who have something called
paronis disease where they may develop a
plaque on their penis and a curvature
and so there's one device that's
actually made that bends away from the
plaque to help sort of break down that
plaque um so there are two uses for it
but essentially these devices are just
like stretching the tissue over time and
so the original traction devices that
were studied you would have to use them
for 6 to 8 hours a day for several
months to see a 2cm in inrease in length
now um that may be enough for some
people they were like yes I definitely
want that and some people like you know
what it may or may I mean 2 cm is the
average some are going to be less right
so um it's sort of do you have the time
to do that do you want to do that but
now there are sort of newer devices
where they've study them and use them
like twice a day for 30 minutes and
they've seen some increase in Penal
length they're generally pretty safe
it's more about um you might have some
bruising from just putting the traction
device on and as long as you follow the
instructions you're probably not going
to hurt yourself is that penis pump no
pumps are different so pumps have not
been shown to increase pening what a
pump is it's got a it's got a a a
cylinder that you put your penis into
and it uses sort of vacuum technology to
sort of suck blood into the tissues and
then you put um if you're having issues
with erectile function you would then
put a ring uh at the base of the penis
to maintain the erection uh these don't
help with length they've looked at them
in those cases they've also looked at
surgeries and different types of things
to increase penal length and ultimately
many of them either have you know a very
high complication rate um or risks that
I would say are probably not advisable
for most people um you know I think that
in terms of penal lengthening people are
always like why would you want to do
that why a lot of people will sort of
poo poo people who want to change the
way their penis looks and I've sort of
evolved in my thinking and saying well
you know what this is a big part of um
you know a man's identity and how he
feels about himself and I wish we had
something that was safe and easy for men
to do like we have breast implants but
we're not there yet right and so I just
want people to be safe in terms of
realizing what our limitations are at
this time and things may change over you
know as people become more interested in
this
area P the role that's played in our
perception of what a normalized penis is
do you know any of any data on what how
big people think a penis should be
versus how big the penises actually are
yeah so yeah most people think it should
be about 6 in so like we said the
average is around 5.1 to 5.3 in and so
when you look at the data in terms of
what people think it should be men think
it should be about 6 in in terms of
women where we found the data about what
they prefer um is sort of interesting so
when now that we're having um more
surgeries for
transmen one of the surgeries that we do
is a Neo phalus is we create a new phus
and one of the the types of surgeries we
do is we use a forearm flap and so it
can be very very long and very very
girthy and in fact they were doing these
surgeries and they realized that some
people were actually unable to have sex
with it because it was too girthy so
they wanted to then look at like well
how do we determine the right size and
length length and girth of this neop
fallis so that we you know they can then
have sex with it so what they did was
they looked at um the top you know the
top five to 10 sex AIDS or or toys that
women are purchasing online and they you
know you can imagine that when you think
of a dildo they can go from one you know
all the way to like the largest thing
you've ever seen and the giri thing
you've ever seen to like a normal size
and so when you have the option to pick
as many as you want right what do you
pick and so what they found was that
women tend to pick the length of about 6
in but as you know you're not putting
the whole device in there has to be a
handle or something so it's probably
around what the normal size is and the
girth was also around the average girth
of the male penis and so generally
speaking women tend to want what is
average or around average right and um
interestingly there's a product that is
available called onut I'm not I don't
I'm not sponsored by them or anything
but essentially you you for women who
have pain with penetration with men who
are too well endowed the men actually
wears it so that the entire phus doesn't
go in during sexual intercourse so that
it's more comfortable for the partner so
we know that sometimes it can be really
uncomfortable if it's too well- endowed
and so I think ultimately um while I
understand that pornography has made
people really self-conscious about the
length of their penis and I I'm really
sad about that because I think you as
we've talked about earlier clal
stimulation is the easiest way for women
to Climax and you don't need penetration
for that so in order to have pleasure
and give pleasure you don't need a large
penis and in fact some women may not
even care what size your penis is it's
more of a a societal thing that we talk
about right women joke about it women
talk about it I mean you can't go you
know you even I've accidentally made
comments where I've been like oh that's
great that like he has a large penis I'm
like well I can't believe I just said
that like I'll say it and I'll be like
oh my God I can't believe that came out
of my mouth of all people and I think
it's just so ingrained in our brain to
be like oh like to celebrate really
well-endowed organs when in reality it's
not necessary and sometimes even painful
will my penis get smaller as I age so
not if you are healthy so in terms of
how do we maintain our penal Health
right your body does a really good job
of trying to maintain penal health
because over the course of a nighttime
men will get five to six erections three
to six erections over the course of the
night and that will happen whether you
have a sexual dream or not whether you
are sleeping in a certain way or not
it's because your body is sort of giving
blood flow to the area periodically
through the night whether you're having
sex whe that you're not you're getting
good oxygenated blood flow to the penis
now if you develop other conditions
where you cannot get blood flow to the
penis like you get high blood pressure
you get diabetes you get heart disease
and those arteries start getting
narrowed and then you stop getting
nighttime erections and you start having
difficulty getting erections over time
the tissues can change and they can
become what we call fibrotic and they
can become a little less spongy and less
elastic and so in those cases you can
see a little bit of shortening now
people will also see shortening because
they gain weight over the course of
their lifetime and as you gain weight
the penal the penis is not shrinking but
the the fat on the MS or the area right
above the penis is sort of getting
larger and obscuring how much penis
length there is there's a one of the my
around penis size is that you know if I
have big hands because you know these
aren't small hands if I have big hands
then I have a big penis or if I have big
feet then I have a big penis is there
data to support this idea that the
length of my any part of my body is
correlated to my penis SI yeah there's
one study it's a Japanese study where
they looked at only Japanese men uh so
take there are some limitations but
essentially they measured all these body
parts and penal length uh and uh what
they found was that nose length was
correlated with penal length not hand
length or foot
length so how do I increase the length
of my
nose yeah but uh I I thought that was
really interesting again nothing you can
control these things are PR genetically
determined to some degree and in fact
you know we talked about some Trends and
while we've seen
um semen qual a sperm quality change
over the last 50 years we've also seen
penal length change average over many
last I don't know the exact number but
50 years and they've actually seen penal
length is increasing and they think that
this is because the onset of puberty is
changing and boys are getting exposed to
factors that are making them go through
puberty earlier and hence they're
getting more exposure to testosterone
and they're developing longer penises um
so sort of interesting theoretical thing
I don't know if that's true or not but
sort of what the theory is yeah I
actually read about that study it says
that a study shows that men's average
ere penis size has increased over the
last 29 years from 4.8 in to 6 in mhm
that's pretty pretty dramatic that's
huge yeah wait another 29
years you could be a Jesus J Christ but
I don't think women's vaginal lengths
are changing so I don't know what that
means oh yeah ah yeah it's interesting
because you when you we talked about the
vaginal length enlarging as someone
becomes aroused you mentioned that it
goes from about roughly about 3 in on
average to about 6 in that also
correlates with the size of the flaccid
penis to the size of the erect penis
going from about 3.6 in flaccid to about
5.1 to 5.2 in erect so you kind of see
that these two things are actually made
made for each other yeah they are I mean
I think in general like we're all we're
I mean we're we're designed right the
the biggest thing that we need to do as
a species is have children right that is
like sort of the the goal of life is to
propagate our species and so it would
make sense that we would be designed to
be able to do that easily a lot of
people are having this um new procedure
called label of plasy is did I pronounce
that correctly labioplasty labioplasty
what is this why so labioplasty is a
essentially taking the labia uh manora
and and and making them a little shorter
or smaller depending on what your
preference is and labas come in all
sorts of shapes and sizes it's the inner
lips of the vagina so they come in all
sorts of shapes and sizes sometimes they
will be um lopsided so one will be
longer than the other some will be
longer some will be smaller and
oftentimes we're seeing in pornography
really small labium manur and so people
will tend to feel like maybe they should
look look like that now not everybody
some people actually have discomfort
their labia are so long that they cause
friction or pain or discomfort in those
cases it's it's absolutely uh reasonable
but just like people have insecurities
about their genitalia when they're men
women also can have insecurities about
their labia as women and so labia plas
is essentially making those smaller and
more cosmetically appealing when women
desire that um but I think the the
important thing to take home is they are
so diverse they're as diverse as your
fingerprint your labia is unique to you
and it is not um there's no script of
what it should look like uh and so I
generally tell people if that's
something you want that's absolutely
fine but again this is not a pathology
or a bad thing this is something that
you know is more cosmetic and there's
been an 80% increase in the surgery of
labioplasty from 2015 to 2019 which is
you know a lot a lot it's a lot last
thing about um women in ejaculation in
the vagina is about squirting very
misunderstood like you know as a as a
man that doesn't have a vagina um I've
seen squirting on pornography that I've
watched I watch pornography I think
that's important to say I think a lot of
people do watch pornography um and in
the pornography that I've watched the
woman squirts this liquid comes out and
like is that Seaman is that ejaculate or
is that something else what is it and
also should we be aiming to make our
partner squirt yeah let's talk about it
so this is important and it's actually
interesting I just I just had a
conversation with a researcher about
this because it's so misunderstood and
we still don't know like there's only
been like three or four studies looking
at female ejaculation squirting over the
course of our history there's different
types of fluids the vagina makes one is
obviously lubrication that's different
and that can be very copious for some
very not as copious for others uh that's
one type of fluid the other type of
fluid is female ejaculate now female
ejaculate is similar to male ejaculate
it comes from the skin glands that same
female prostate it is a small amount of
like sort of sticky white fluid that
women ejaculate um and so they will
release that fluid and it's not like
this copious amount of fluid that you're
seeing on
pornography uh the next type of fluid is
squirting and squirting is it's been
described as a clear colorless odorless
fluid that's emitted from the urethra um
when they've looked at analyses of these
they found that there is what we call
PSA or prostate specific antigen now
that we think of traditionally as males
but the women's skin glands make it as
well now people are like is it P right
that's the big question and so in the
one where they looked at the analysis
they found that it was there was like
dilute urine and then another study
looked at like okay they scanned people
before squirting and after and they
scann their bladders to see like did the
amount of urine change and they said it
did and now it's urine but what we
really don't know and what we what what
the limitation is that you never so
women know when they squirt like they
they know it's not urine so if you talk
to enough women who are squirting
they'll be like you know it's not urine
I'm sure it's not urine but where is
that fluid coming from that that's where
the question comes right and so like if
it's not urine it's coming from the
urethro like it doesn't make sense and
so uh this is Dr Barry korak who's done
a lot of research on orgasm he said you
know it may be water imbibition so when
you think of like fluid filling the
walls of the uterus and the vagina
during during or during the process of
arousal and that may be during climax
when you have actually contractions of
that fluid of those of those organs that
occurs during climax that it can
actually release this fluid I don't know
I think the jwelry remains out I don't
think we have a conclusive answer
because the studies are not perfectly
designed we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to be leaving
it for and the question that's been left
for
you if there was one message that you
want your life's work to communicate to
the world what would it be and
why my message is that sexual health is
health and that we need to be
prioritizing our sexual health and
educate our young people about sex and
why because I think the impacts of
having negative sexual health or
negative sexual encounters can be so
dramatic in terms of physiologic
outcomes interpersonal outcomes work
productivity I mean it can be very
far-reaching and if we are able to
educate and Empower people we can change
the
world Dr Reena Malik thank you so much
for your time today and thank you so
much for um Illuminating a bunch of
issues on Sexual Health that I've never
really understood or been able to
discuss before and I think these
conversations are so unbelievably
important because as you say there sex
sort of permeates every facet of our
lives and I think sometimes people
wonder why I spend a lot of time on the
show talking about sex when this is
called The Diary of a CEO but that's
because it's the same reason why I spend
a lot of time talking about health and
the brain and Neuroscience and
relationships and everything because
I've come to learn that although I'm a
CEO I'm a business person all of these
things as you've said feed into um my
ability to be a CEO and what is a CEO a
CEO is a human being a CEO is just
someone that is um has a sort of high
inity career we all have high-intensity
careers and we're these multifaceted
objects but some parts of these
multifaceted objects are still in the
shadows because there's stigma and
there's shame and there's not a lot lot
of Education around it and if I think
about my career as a whole um sex and my
relationships have been this huge um
huge part of it that once I focus to
more energy on and started investing in
in every other part of my career
improved every other part of my life
improved my health improved my
performance at work improved my anxiety
levels um dissipated and that's why I
think these conversations are so
unbelievably important and your work
that you've done both in your your sort
of clinical practice but also what
you're doing on YouTube as well which
I'll link below so everyone can go and
see is allowing this information to be
accessible for everybody even those that
don't have um the money to go and drive
as you said to go see a therapist I
think that's an incredibly important
work and I'm glad that you're a world
champion and and a a force behind that
so thank you so much on behalf of me my
team but so everyone that's consumed
your work and gain value from it thank
you I would just say that I always tell
people cuz I Mentor a lot of young
medical students and I I always tell
young women that the number one most
important decision you're going to make
is who you choose as your partner and
that's because that
person whether it's obviously
emotionally but also sexually right how
they support you in your life is going
to determine whether you're able to
succeed or not and I I just was talking
to another woman and and you know she
was like my husband's wonderful I was
like I'm not surprised I was like you
don't get to be a successful woman and a
happy well adjusted successful woman
unless you either are you know very
happy being alone or you have an
excellent partner to support you because
if you have a toxic partner at home it's
not going to work
amen thank
[Music]
you
oh